From: jnc@mercury.lcs.mit.edu (Noel Chiappa)
Date: Sun,  4 May 2014 19:54:26 -0400 (EDT)
Subject: [TUHS] Work I've done with a PDP-11 simulator
Message-ID: <20140504235426.4EF2418C0AA@mercury.lcs.mit.edu>

    > On Sat, May 03, 2014 at 06:20:55PM -0400, Gregg Levine wrote:

    > What he said. I believe we all are interested.

OK, I have whipped up some material on how to bring V6 up under Ersatz-11.
See here:

  http://ana-3.lcs.mit.edu/~jnc/tech/unix/V6Unix.html

That page covers i) how to get the emulator, V6 Unix disks, and what you need
to do start it running, and then ii) some of the initial steps to take past
that to improve to working environment. Included in that are a couple of
things I tripped over, and how to avoid them.

The latter part assumes you want to do something more than just start it, so
you can see it start up; it includes coverage of the commands that work with
the emulator's "DOS device" to do things like read files off the host machine
into the Unix; a serious problem on V6 Unix having to do with 21st Century
dates; a 'more' command for V6 Unix (Vanilla V6 was back before the days of
video terminals... :-); the ability to TELNET into the emulator; and some
useful Windows commands (e.g. to read files out of the Unix into the host
machine, and create blank disk pack files); and finally configuration file
for the E11 emulator.


There is more content/pages coming: the start of an 'advanced things you can
do to improve your V6 Unix' page, which includes the new C compiler [the
'vanilla' V6 C compiler does not handle longs, unsigned, casts, and a bunch
of other things]; tar; the Standard I/O library; etc is already there, but
unfinished. And I have some material on things you can trip over in porting
stuff back and forth (I found some doozies trying to make V6 commands run
under Windoze), etc. But that will be later.


For now, I'm interested in hearing: of any errors or issues with the first
page; whether people find it completely incomprensible, or totally fantastic
(or whereever on the axis between them it lies); what additional topics I
should cover; etc, etc.

Let me know! And enjoy your V6 experience!
	
	Noel


