From: brantley@coraid.com (Brantley Coile)
Date: Wed, 20 Jul 2005 17:18:24 -0400
Subject: [TUHS] Borland's C++ BuilderX, Personal Edition
Message-ID: <bfb8fe6f29ee2865079c5a2704399ebe@coraid.com>

> I do not know Plan9, but according to descriptions I have read, it looks
> very interesting. Well it was developed by Bell Lab...(?)-AT/T, which
> does not require recommendation.They offer also another interesting OS,
> namely Inferno.

This is my last email on this subject.  Promise.

I suggest using the Plan 9 compilers and start with the code for the
32V system.  That's the code that first ran on the VAX.  It'll be
easier to move than the PDP version.  It's just Seventh Edition moved
to the VAX.

I'm using Plan 9 to type this.  It's the os I have used as my primary
os for the last 10 years.  I wrote the Cisco PIX Firewall and the
LocalDirector using it.  I first used Plan 9 15 years ago at Bell Labs.
In a very real sense, it is the true decendent of a very noble line of
timesharing systems, going all the way back to MIT's CTSS.

You should try Plan 9 for free by downloading it  from Bell Labs.  It's
all open source.  Expect to learn a lot.  It's UNIX like a Ford
Mustang is a T-Model.  Lot of the ideas of V7-10 are further developed
in Plan 9.  It's certainly the os perfered by a good number of UNIX
purests.  It was the result of a number of poeple, including Ken
Thompson, who thought that a fresh code start would allow them to
better exploit new technology like networking, hetergenious
processors, and symmetrical multiple processors.
http://plan9.bell-labs.com

I really hope James does the port.  I wish I had the time to do it
myself.  A native V7 port would be really useful in some situations,
but more importantly it would help educate new generations of
programmers.  It would demonstrate the true power and synergy of the
software tools approach that UNIX blessed us with.  It doesn't need
shared libraries, threads, gui's or even vi.  The Seventh Edition is
amazing technology in a form that can be understood, internalized, and
the resulting education used to produce much better modern software.
There should be at least a version in it's native form.  There's just
something special about running it native.

  Brantley Coile



