From: asbesto@freaknet.org (asbesto)
Date: Thu, 5 Sep 2013 23:10:12 +0200
Subject: [TUHS] Museo dell'Informatica Funzionante: APPLE 1 PRESENTATION,
	13/9/2013
Message-ID: <20130905211012.GA31424@freaknet.org>

PRESS RELEASE - PLEASE COPY AND SHARE! 

                           APPLE 1

                    FRIDAY, Sept. the 13th 
 at the "Museo dell'Informatica Funzionante" Computer Museum
    Via Carnevale 17, 96010 Palazzolo Acreide (SR) - ITALY

 http://museo.freaknet.org/en/presentazione-progetto-apple-1/

The APPLE 1 marked the start of the era of "personal computing",
a computer that people could keep at home on their desks, a
pioneer vision at that time, that opened the way for the future
of human-machine interfaces. Born from the genius of Steve
Wozniak, it transformed Apple into today ‘s success, thanks also
to the entrepreneurial audacity of Steve Jobs.

At that time only about 200 pieces were produced; today only
about 50 of them survived, of which only a dozen are fully
working. The APPLE 1 was an open project since its birth: he
schematics and instructions were already circulating among fans
well before the creation of Apple as a company. From this early
computer, Steve Wozniak created the legendary APPLE 2, a
colossal success that transformed him and Steve Jobs into
billionaires.

We started this adventure almost two years ago at the "Museo
dell'Informatica Funzionante" Computer Museum: to rebuild from
scratch, starting from a completely blank electronic card, a
working APPLE 1, using tools and components dated exactly or
before its creation: 1976.

A year and a half  was spent searching for integrated circuits,
connectors, electronic components of various types, bought new
or second-hand, found in various parts of the world, but all
identical to the originals, with the right features and from the
same historical period. The project, managed by a local team,
involved fans and professionals from all the world.

So we present today our creation, made entirely in
Sicily, Palazzolo Acreide, Italy: a specimen of APPLE Computer
1, fully functional, rebuilt with attention to every detail and
using only original components at the best of our possibility!

With this release we intend to invite everyone to the event of
his first start, in person or remotely via our live streaming.

Friday, September 13, 2013:

19:00 - Presentation of the APPLE 1 project and the computer
19.30 - Booting up the rebuilt APPLE 1 Computer, and operational
        demo 
20:00 - Aperitif

Remote presence:

Via live chat on IRC: https://irc.dyne.org, channel #museo

Live video streaming: http://bambuser.com/channel/musif

On Twitter: follow @FreaknetMuseum

All people in Palazzolo Acreide can also have a guided tour of
our exibithion "Apple, il genio di Steve Wozniak", dedicated to
the genius of Steve Wozniak and his creations, with working
Apple computers and memorabilia from 1978 to 1999.

For more information, press kits and interviews please write to
museo at freaknet.org


