From: camille.paloque-berges@lecnam.net (Paloque-berges Camille)
Date: Fri, 16 Jun 2017 22:21:31 +0200
Subject: [TUHS] International conference: "Unix in Europe : between
 innovation, diffusion and heritage"
In-Reply-To: <ef06f3c9-c808-0d7e-7bc8-438384e81ad6@lecnam.net>
References: <ef06f3c9-c808-0d7e-7bc8-438384e81ad6@lecnam.net>
Message-ID: <9ff57d45-7b85-f2d4-5c13-d65b68e433c2@lecnam.net>

Dear THUS list,

I am a recent lurker on this list, also a history and communication 
scholar looking at pieces of Unix history for my research. I hope it is 
okay if I share with you the news of a historical conference on Unix 
that we are organizing in France next Fall with fellow humanities 
scholars and computer scientists and engineers involved in the history 
and heritage of computing and computers.

You are of course welcomed, even encouraged, to submit a proposal. It 
will be a pleasure to meet you at this conference in any case.

Best,
Camille Paloque-Berges

***

Please find enclosed the CFP for the *international conference**"Unix in 
Europe: between innovation, diffusion and heritage"* that will take 
place in Cnam (Paris, France), October, 19th, 2017.

A one-page abstract (maximum 500 words) with a short biography is 
expected for June 30th 2017.

The Cfp is also available at :
<http://technique-societe.cnam.fr/international-symposium-unix-in-europe-between-innovation-diffusion-and-heritage-913107.kjsp>.

Best regards,

The organization comitee : Isabelle Astic, Raphaël Fournier-S'niehotta,
Pierre-Eric Mounier-Kuhn, Camille Paloque-Berges, Loïc Petitgirard




    ------------------------------------------------------------


    *Call for contributions*

    *International symposium *

    *Unix in Europe: between innovation, diffusion and heritage*

    */Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France –
    October 19 2017/*

    **

    Communications and discussions will be held in French or English.

    *
    *

    *Rationale*

    *
    *

    **The Unix system was born in the 1970s at the crossroads between
    two interacting worlds: industry (the Bell Labs at AT&T) and
    academia (the University of Berkeley computer science network). Its
    fast adoption throughout computer research and engineering networks
    across the world signaled the future success of the new system,
    fostering software experiments within its open, multi-user and
    multi-tasking system running on mini-computers – and later
    compatible with a larger part of computer hardware. In the European
    context, how was this American innovation propagated, adopted and
    adapted? Why was Unix of so much interest in this context, then and
    now? A solid culture of Unix users might also explain this success,
    as well as subsequent processes of appropriation and inheritance,
    due to the long and complex history of Unix versioning. The memory
    of Unix users is vivid indeed, fed by early accounts within the
    computer world (Salus, 1994) as well as preservation initiatives
    (Toomey, 2010). Moreover, the Unix system is a crucial reference in
    the history of computing, in particular in the field of free and
    open source software (Kelty, 2008), computer networks
    (Paloque-Berges, 2017), as well as in programming language
    philosophy (Mélès, 2013).


    In order to explore the variety of these interrogations, this
    symposium encourages contributions from historians as well as
    philosophers, social science researchers, and heritage professionals
    interested in the history of computer open systems and software with
    a focus on Unix or who have a wider perspective. It will also
    welcome protagonists and witnesses of Unix culture and carriers of
    its memory. We wish to discuss and shed light on several aspects of
    the development of Unix in Europe (including in comparison or
    relation with the rest of the world) along three main lines:
    historical and sociological, philosophical and epistemological, and
    heritage- and preservation-oriented.


    *1/ Historical and sociological perspectives*

    *
    *

    Historically, the Unix system is linked to the promotion and
    development in research on open systems and computer networks. How
    does this fit in the context of industrial, scientific and
    technological policies defined at the national and European level?
    The history of Unix thus reaches at least three levels of
    interrogations: 1/ the forms, places and practices of innovation
    around Unix in R&D labs and computing centers in companies, schools
    and universities; 2/ planning, promoting and negotiating open
    systems (norms and standards) from the perspective of science and/or
    politics; 3/ international geopolitical relations, whether
    economical or geopolitical and even geostrategic (for example
    between Unix users, with users of other computer equipment or other
    hardware and software companies, the role of embargos in the
    shipping of mini-computers, of code, and military uses of Unix).


    In parallel, how has the world of computer research welcomed,
    encouraged, negotiated and propagated uses and innovations related
    to Unix systems? This begs the question of how Unix-related research
    and development was legitimized - or played a part in the
    legitimization of computer science experimentalism in the scientific
    field and beyond. We would also like to highlight practices of
    resistance, the failure to acknowledge, ignorance of or even the
    limits of the Unix system, its software tools and hardware
    environment (beginning with the famous PDP and Vax machines from
    Digital Equipment where the first Unix versions were implemented).
    With a focus on occupational computer uses, we call for analysis
    which aims to explore and clarify:

    - the role of developers, users, and user associations – from the
    point of view of pioneers as well as helpers, maintainers and other
    witnesses of the implementation of Unix;

    - the context, process, and people who determined its propagation,
    appropriation, and development over time;

    - the meaning of concepts of Unix philosophy and ethics such as
    “openness” and “autonomy”, from a social, political or economic
    point of view.


    *2. Philosophical and epistemological perspectives*

    We will foster research and reflection at the crossroad of the
    theoretical foundations of computer systems and engineering
    pragmatism, between the philosophy of computer systems and Unixian
    practices.

    Protagonists in the conception and diffusion of Unix often claim to
    have a ‘Unix philosophy’ . But beyond statement of principle, what
    was the real influence of this idea on the technical choices
    underlying the system’s developments? What are the ethical, moral,
    and philosophical motivations – alongside the social, political or
    economic dimensions discussed earlier – underpinning the adoption of
    Unix or pretending to extend it (for instance in relation to the
    notions of sharing, modularity or freedom)? How is the idea of
    ‘openness’ attached to Unix practices and heritage (free software,
    open source) conceived? What are the theoretical developments to be
    drawn from it (for instance with the idea of open software)?

    The logical and mathematical foundations of Unix should be
    readdressed. Do the fundamental concepts of Unix have an ontological
    or metaphysical significance beyond the sole research aim of
    technical efficiency? What role do aesthetics play in the
    formulation of general principles and technical choices? How can we
    analyze programming languages such as C and its successors, scripts,
    software, and generally speaking, the proliferating source codes of
    Unix? How do we consider the system, the software environment, as
    well as the hardware in which Unix is implemented and executed?

    Such philosophical questions also cover the modalities of the
    transmission of Unix, extending to the investigation of the
    respective roles of theory and practice in the teaching of the
    system, the teaching of knowledge and tools underlying the system or
    supporting the system.

    *3. Unix heritage and ‘heritagization’*

    **

    France is now the home to multiple initiatives taking place to build
    and preserve a material and immaterial heritage of computer science
    and technology – such as ‘Software Heritage’ at INRIA, a global
    software archive in progress. The Museum of Arts et Métiers gave
    impetus to the MINF initiative (‘Pour un Musée de l’informatique et
    du numérique’) and coordinates the ‘Patstec Mission’ dealing with
    contemporary scientific and technological heritage preservation,
    including computer science. At an international scale and with a
    grassroots perspective carried by the community of Unix users, the
    TUHS (The Unix Heritage Society) demonstrates the current interest
    in the specific heritage linked to Unix. We encourage reflections on
    this heritage and its specific features:

    - What is the place of Unix in the construction of computer science
    heritage? Is it possible to map Unix systems and their heritage,
    from the standpoint of machines, languages and software? What has
    already been collected? What corpus, data bases, and/or platforms
    with a patrimonial mission are concerned with Unix and to what purpose?

    - How are the questions of training, constitution and diffusion of a
    Unix culture incorporated in the effort to collect heritage? How do
    we evaluate and put forward the importance of immaterial heritage
    attached to Unix, considering the effects of community and memory in
    its history and for the writing of its history?

    - What are the practices and modalities advocated by the unixian
    heritage itself? What has been its influence on the field of
    computer engineering and research as well as diverse fields such as:
    popularization of science and technology, ‘hacker’ movements and
    many ‘maker’ practices today (Lallement, 2016)?


    *Schedules*

    Please send a one-page abstract (maximum 500 words) with a short
    biography by June 30, 2017 to: camille.paloque-berges at cnam.fr
    <mailto:camille.paloque-berges at lecnam.net>and
    loic.petitgirard at cnam.fr <mailto:loic.petitgirard at cnam.fr>. Accepted
    contributions and speakers will be notified by July 15, 2017.


    *Organizing committee*

    Isabelle Astic (Musée des arts et métiers)

    Raphaël Fournier-S’niehotta (Cédric, Cnam)

    Pierre-Eric Mounier-Kuhn (CRM, Paris 1)

    Camille Paloque-Berges (HT2S, Cnam)

    Loïc Petitgirard (HT2S, Cnam)


    *Scientific committee *

    François Anceau (UMPC-LIP6)**

    Pierre Cubaud (Cédric, Cnam)

    Liesbeth de Mol (STL, Lille 3)

    Claudine Fontanon (CAK, EHESS)

    Gérald Kembellec (DICEN, Cnam)

    Baptiste Mélès (Archives Henri Poincaré, CNRS)

    Pierre Paradinas (Cédric, Cnam, SIF)

    Giuseppe Primiero (Middlesex University)

    Lionel Tabourier (LIP6, Paris 6)**


    *Institutional partners and support: *

    - Project « Hist.Pat.info.Cnam », HT2S, Cnam – Research program
    supported by the Excellence laboratory History and Anthropology of
    Knoweldge, Technics and Beliefs (HASTEC), and in partnership with
    the laboratories CEDRIC (Cnam), DICEN (Cnam), and the Center
    Alexandre Koyré (EHESS).

    - « Histoire de l’informatique » (« History of computing » seminar)
    seminar - (Musée des arts et métiers, CRM, Paris 1, UMPC-LIP6)

    - « Source code » seminar - (CNRS, Cnam, Université Paris 6).

    With support from the DHST/DLMPST for the History and Philosophy of
    Computing (HAPOC)


    *Bibliography *

    Kelty, Christopher M. 2008. /Two Bits: The Cultural Significance of
    Free Software/. Durham: Duke University Press Books.

    Lallement, Michel. 2016. /L’âge du faire, /Seuil.

    Mélès, Baptiste. 2003. « Unix selon l’ordre des raisons : la
    philosophie de la pratique informatique ». /Philosophia Scientiæ/17
    (3): 181‑98.

    Salus, Peter H. 1994. /A quarter century of UNIX/. Addison-Wesley.
    Reading.

    Toomey, Warren. 2010. « First Edition Unix: Its Creation and
    Restoration ». /IEEE Annals of the History of Computing/ 32 (3): 74‑82.

    *
    *

    **



-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: <http://minnie.tuhs.org/pipermail/tuhs/attachments/20170616/79c2f57c/attachment-0001.html>

