From: dave@horsfall.org (Dave Horsfall)
Date: Sat, 17 Feb 2018 17:47:22 +1100 (EST)
Subject: [TUHS] Of birthdays etc
Message-ID: <alpine.BSF.2.21.1802171649520.798@aneurin.horsfall.org>

Blimey...  How was I to know that a throw-away remark would almost develop 
into a shitfight?  It would help if people changed the Subject line too, 
as I'm sure that Ken must've been a little peeved...  It would also help 
if users didn't bloody top-post either, but I suspect that I've lost that 
fight.

Anyway, this whole business started when I thought it might be a good idea 
to post reminders of historical events here, as I do with some of the 
other lists that I infest^W infect^W inhabit.  I figured that the old 
farts here might like to be reminded of (IMHO) significant events, and 
similarly the youngsters might want to be reminded that there was indeed 
life before Linux (which, by the way, I happen to loathe, but that's a 
different story).

I'm glad that some people appreciate it; and don't worry, Steffen, you'll 
soon catch up, as they should all be in the archives :-)  A long-term goal 
(if I live that long) is to set up one of those "this day in history" 
sites, but it looks like Harris' Lament[*] has already applied :-(

I've had a number of corrections (thanks!), some weird comments on 
pronunciation (an Englishman can probably pick my ancestry from me saying 
"castle" as "c-AH-stle" and "dance" as "d-A-nce" etc), but oddly enough no 
criticism (well, unless I'm talking about mounting a magtape as a 
filesystem; no, I will not forget the implication that I was a liar), and 
Warren has yet to spank me...

For the morbidly curious I keep these events in Calendar on my MacBook 
(which actually spends most of its time in Terminal, and I don't even know 
how to use the Finder!), and am always noting things which interest me and 
therefore possibly others.

Anyway, thanks all; it is an honour and a privilege to share a mailing 
list with some of the people who wrote the software that I have both used 
in the past and still use to this day.

[*]
Harris' Lament?  Look it up with your favourite search engine (I don't use 
Google).

-- 
Dave Horsfall DTM (VK2KFU)  "Those who don't understand security will suffer."

