From: david@kdbarto.org (David)
Date: Fri, 18 Nov 2016 09:12:17 -0800
Subject: [TUHS] TUHS Digest, Vol 12, Issue 5
In-Reply-To: <mailman.1.1479434401.5303.tuhs@minnie.tuhs.org>
References: <mailman.1.1479434401.5303.tuhs@minnie.tuhs.org>
Message-ID: <518B4BD2-FFBE-43C4-BD54-3C609C42307E@kdbarto.org>

Can’t help about that DEC-ism.

Do have these 2.

News from Xerox Corporation:

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
XEROX ANNOUNCES HYPER-ETHERNET

SAN FRANCISCO, CA. Jan 7. 2010 - Xerox today announced Hyper-Ethernet their fourth
generation local area network. In addition to its ability to transmit text data and images, Hyper-
Ethernet enables the transmission of people. ”People transmission over Hyper-Ethernet" according
to Michael Liddle, V.P. of Office Systems. "will greatly reduce elevator congestion and eliminate the
need for video conferencing.“ Order taking for Hyper-Ethemet will begin next month. Installation
will start in Los Angeles in the Third Quarter.

In a related announcement. Wang Labs. headquartered in Hoboken. New Jersey, announced Super-
Hyper Wangnet their twelfth generation local area network. According to Freddie Wang, President
of Wang Labs. "Super-Hyper-Wangnet will not only transmit people over the Wangband, but will
also transmit furniture and buildings over the interconnect and utility bands. These additional
capabilities of Super-Hyper Wangnet are vital to the emerging office of the future." Order taking
for Super-Hyper-Wangnet will begin next month. Installation has already occurred worldwide.
IBM Corporation. who has been rumored to be about to announce a local area network since 1980,
was not available for comment.

xxx

Followed by

Digital Responds to Hyper-Ethernet
TEWKSBURY. MA. April 1. 2010 -- Digital Equipment announced today it's new DECnet Phase
XVIII Architecture. In response to recent Xerox and Wang improvements to Ethernet that provide
people and facility transportation across inter-node links DEC‘s latest DECnet provides these
capabilities as well as providing for the creation of virtual facilities and even countries. These
capabilities are provided by breakthroughs in communications technology that actually uses the
Ether as a communications media. Through the use of a new dedicated NANO-PDP-11/E99
gateway processor system, ETHERGATE, DECnet users can access anywhere in the Ethereal Plane.

This development obsoletes teleconferencing, since meeting groups can create their own common
conference rooms and cafeterias, thus resolving space, travel and dining problems. There may be a
few bugs left, as some of the dissenting DECnet Review Group members have not been seen since
the last meeting held in such a virtual conference facility.

This breakthrough was brought about by a team effort of the Distributed Systems‘ Software and
Hardware engineering teams in a effort to improve on their Tewksbury, Massachusetts facility. In a
compromise decision, Distributed Systems will maintain an ETHERGATE in TWOOO, but it will
connect directly to their new home somewhere in the Shire of their newly deﬁned Middle Earth
reality. Despite some difﬁculties, the scenery, windows tax breaks, pool and racquetball courts
made the relocation go quite smoothly. Engineering Network topology will not change, as all
forwarding will be done by the TWOOO Ethereal Plane Router residing in the crater at the former
building site.

Utility packages such as Ethereal Person Transfer (EPT) and Ethereal Facility Transfer (EFT)
provide appropriate capabilities for casual users. Sophiscated users can create (SCREATE), access
(SOPEN), and delete (SNUKE) ethereal entities transparently from high level languages using the
Ethereal Management System (EMS) package and the Ethereal Access Protocol (EAP). An
ETHERTRIEVE utility for easy interactive use will be available shortly.

DECnet Phase XVIII follows on the success of the Phase XVI ability to access everyone‘s Digital
Professional wrist watch computer system. This lead to the current Phase XVII architecture, which
has routing capabilities that allow direct communications with the entire Earth population's Atari
home video games.

Distributed Systems architects are hard at work on the next phase of DECnet that will include
multi-plane existence network management (using the NIECE protocol) and galaxy level routing
using 64K bit addresses.

Digital will continue to support it's Gateway products into the Prime Material Plane. These
products include an IBM ANA (Acronym-based Network Architecture) Gateway, the TOLKIEN
product that allows control of all ring based networks, and our Mega-broad-jump-band hardware
which leaps past Wang's products in the hype weary business marketplace.

