From: jrvalverde@cnb.csic.es (Jose R. Valverde)
Date: Tue, 19 Dec 2017 17:13:45 +0100
Subject: [TUHS] Various Unix
Message-ID: <20171219171345.59efbf33@cnb.csic.es>

Before we had to phase out our FTP server, I kept on it several
versions of UNIX clones and related OS that were mostly not on TUHS.
This post is to remember some of these systems. Many of these were
open sourced or widely available at some time and were related to UNIX
one way or another. I may not have the latest versions or all the
versions, but at least I do keep something.

The following ones have been open sourced at some point in time (I
believe):

	ChorusOS
	Coherent
	EXOS
	L4
	Lunix
	MaRTE-OS
	Mach
	OpenBLT
	OpenSolaris
	Sprite	(I also own the original distribution CD)
	Trix
	UniFlex
	agnix
	amoeba
	bkunix
	bsd386
	hurd
	iunix
	jaluna-c5
	lsx-unix
	mini-unix
	minix
	omu
	opensolaris
	starunix
	thix
	from tliquest.net/local/unix: uzi and various other bits
	tme
	tropix
	tunix
	unix-v8
	unix-wega
	uzi
	xhomer
	xinu
	xv6
	yoctix

Plus several archaic CDs with early versions of Linux,
Open/Free/NetBSD, (Walnut Creek, InfoMagic, etc. CD/ROMs)
and even the Beowulf/Extreme Linux CDs (plus I must keep around the
mirror we hosted for a long time of the Beowulf site). The hobbyist CDs
for OpenSolaris 8 (and I believe 9) with sources. Oh, and
MOSIX/OPENMOSIX.


In addition, I have many other sources whose Copyright status I'm not
aware of, but which are interesting for archival purposes.

Regarding QNX, yes, it was open sourced (at least for hobbyist use, I
have to check the license) for several distributions. I ported some
bioinformatics software and kept for some time a distribution
repository, and I'm pretty certain I must have the sources as well as
the virtual machines. I'll try to verify the licenses to see if it can
be redistributed, although I doubt they can. Oh, and I also own the
mentioned famous 3.5" diskette. I think I digitized it long ago. Would
have to check.

Off the Net, it has been possible, one time or another, to recover
executables and, sometime, even sources, of many systems. Archive.org
has -I believe- a copy of a once famous repo of abandonware with
binaries of SCO, System V, AIX, etc...

I know that AIX, ATT systemV vI, II, III and IV, Solaris V6, Tru64,
OSF-1, Dynix, Ultrix 11, BSDI, Ultrix-32 etc... have been out there at
some time or another in source code format, and binaries of IRIX, Lisa,
QNX, A/UX, xenix...

Some years ago, I had more free time and could test many systems on
emulators, and built images and accompanying scripts ready ti run. I
also made some tools to be able to transfer data in and out of old
unix versions (so I could edit the software off the virtual machine
while back-porting a screen editor to V6, v5, etc... with only vt100
support).

Not UNIX-related, I also keep copies of many other ancient operating
systems and software and hardware emulators.


Well, as I said at the beginning, everything that I had, I should still
keep while the hard disks continue spinning. If there is any
interest in adding any of these to TUHS, I can try to find a way to
send it all.

If I find time to browse through everything, I would like to upload all
the source code to GitHub (at least anything that's redistributable).
If I find the time...

But, Warren, if you are interested in anything, let me know and I'll
find a way to give you access.

				 j

--
		Scientific Computing Service
	Solving all your computer needs for Scientific
			Research.

		http://bioportal.cnb.csic.es

